---
course_id: res-18-005-highlights-of-calculus-spring-2010
is_media_gallery: true
layout: course_section
menu:
  leftnav:
    identifier: 7d81baa6870f6d7768ee34a72b7f8625
    name: Highlights of Calculus (5 videos)
    weight: 10
title: Highlights of Calculus (5 videos)
type: course
uid: 7d81baa6870f6d7768ee34a72b7f8625

---

These five Highlights of Calculus videos provide an overview of the key topics and ideas of calculus and how they apply to real-life situations and problems. In addition to the videos, there are summary slides and practice problems complete with an audio narration by Professor Strang. You can find these files under the Related Resources tab on each video page.{{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/highlights_of_calculus/big-picture-of-calculus" section="Highlights of Calculus (5 videos)" title="Big Picture of Calculus" description="Calculus is about change. One function tells how quickly another  function is changing. Professor Strang shows how calculus applies to  ordinary life situations, such as: driving a car climbing a mountain growing to full adult height Professor Strangs Calculus textbook (1st edition, 1991) is freely available here. Subtitles are provided through the generous assistance of Jimmy Ren." thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/UcWsDwg1XwM/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/highlights_of_calculus/big-picture-derivatives" section="Highlights of Calculus (5 videos)" title="Big Picture: Derivatives" description="Calculus finds the relationship between the distance traveled and the  speed — easy for constant speed, not so easy for changing speed.  Professor Strang is finding the rate of change and the slope of a  curve and the derivative of a function. Professor Strangs Calculus textbook (1st edition, 1991) is freely available here. Subtitles are provided through the generous assistance of Jimmy Ren." thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/T_I-CUOc_bk/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/highlights_of_calculus/max-and-min-and-second-derivative" section="Highlights of Calculus (5 videos)" title="Max and Min and Second Derivative" description="At the top and bottom of a curve (Max and Min), the slope is zero. The  second derivative shows whether the curve is bending down or up. Here  is a real-world example of a minimum problem: What route from home to work takes the shortest time? Professor Strangs Calculus textbook (1st edition, 1991) is freely available here. Subtitles are provided through the generous assistance of Jimmy Ren." thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/tBBJ2TSTa1Q/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/highlights_of_calculus/the-exponential-function" section="Highlights of Calculus (5 videos)" title="The Exponential Function" description="Professor Strang explains how the magic number e connects to ordinary things like the interest on a bank account. The graph of y = e x has the special property that its slope equals its  height (it goes up exponentially fast!). This is the great function of  calculus. Professor Strangs Calculus textbook (1st edition, 1991) is freely available here. Subtitles are provided through the generous assistance of Jimmy Ren." thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/oo1ZZlvT2LQ/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/highlights_of_calculus/big-picture-integrals" section="Highlights of Calculus (5 videos)" title="Big Picture: Integrals" description="The second half of calculus looks for the distance traveled even when  the speed is changing. Finding this integral is the opposite of  finding the derivative. Professor Strang explains how the integral adds  up little pieces to recover the total distance. I know the speed at each moment of my trip, so how far did I go? Professor Strangs Calculus textbook (1st edition, 1991) is freely available here. Subtitles are provided through the generous assistance of Jimmy Ren." thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/2qxY859dzzQ/default.jpg" >}}