---
course_id: res-18-005-highlights-of-calculus-spring-2010
is_media_gallery: true
layout: course_section
menu:
  leftnav:
    identifier: 1ed01475c0bcd26684e19218f297165d
    name: Derivatives (12 videos)
    weight: 20
title: Derivatives (12 videos)
type: course
uid: 1ed01475c0bcd26684e19218f297165d

---

These twelve videos on Derivatives dig deeper into the subfield of calculus known as "differential calculus."  Like the overview videos, Professor Strang explains how each topic applies to real-life applications.  Along with the videos, there are summary slides and practice problems available under the Related Resources tab on each video page.{{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/derivatives/derivative-of-sin-x-and-cos-x" section="Derivatives (12 videos)" title="Derivative of sin x and cos x" description="The two key functions of oscillation have specially neat derivatives: The slope of sin x is cos x !    And the slope of cos x is - sin x. These come from one crucial fact:   (sin x) / x approaches 1 at x = 0. This checks that the slope of sin x is cos 0 = 1  at the all-important point x = 0. Professor Strang connects sine and cosine to moving around a circle, or up and down for a spring, or in and out for your lungs. Professor Strangs Calculus textbook (1st edition, 1991) is freely available here. Subtitles are provided through the generous assistance of Jimmy Ren." thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/FtQl1gAo12E/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/derivatives/product-rule-and-quotient-rule" section="Derivatives (12 videos)" title="Product Rule and Quotient Rule" description="How to find the slope of f(x) times g(x) ?   Use the Product Rule. The slope of  f(x)g(x)  has two terms: f(x) times (slope of g(x))   PLUS  g(x) times (slope of f(x)) The Quotient Rule gives the slope of f(x) / g(x) .   That slope is [[  g(x) times (slope of f(x))  MINUS  f(x) times (slope of g(x)) ]] / g squared These rules plus the CHAIN RULE will take you a long way. Professor Strangs Calculus textbook (1st edition, 1991) is freely available here. Subtitles are provided through the generous assistance of Jimmy Ren." thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/5ZpqI8zz1HM/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/derivatives/chains-f-g-x-and-the-chain-rule" section="Derivatives (12 videos)" title="Chains f(g(x)) and the Chain Rule" description="A chain of functions starts with y = g(x)   Then it finds z = f(y).  So z = f(g(x)) Very many functions are built this way, g inside f .   So we need their slopes. The Chain Rule says :  MULTIPLY THE SLOPES  of  f and g. Find dy/dx for g(x).   Then find dz/dy for f(y). Since dz/dy is found in terms of y, substitute g(x) in place of y !!! The way to remember the slope of the chain is dz/dx = dz/dy times dy/dx. Remove y to get a  function of x !   The slope of z = sin (3x) is 3 cos (3x). Professor Strangs Calculus textbook (1st edition, 1991) is freely available here. Subtitles are provided through the generous assistance of Jimmy Ren." thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/yQrKXo89nHA/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/derivatives/limits-and-continuous-functions" section="Derivatives (12 videos)" title="Limits and Continuous Functions" description="What does it mean to say that a sequence of numbers a1, a2, ...  approaches a LIMIT A ? This means:  For any little interval around A, the numbers eventually get in there and stay there. The numbers a1 = 1/2, a2 = 2/3, a3 = 3/4, ...  approach the limit 1.   The first as DONT MATTER Change 2000 as and the limit is still 1.   What about powers of the as like a1^b1   a2^b2 .....  ?? If the bs approach B then those powers approach A^B  except DANGER if B = 0 or infinity For calculus the important case where you CANT TELL by just knowing A and B is A/B = 0/0 If f(x) and g(x) both get small  ( f/g looks like 0/0 ) then lHopital looks at slopes:  f/g goes like f /g When is f(x) continuous at x=a ??  This means: f(x) is close to f(a) when x is close to a. See end of video Professor Strangs Calculus textbook (1st edition, 1991) is freely available here. Subtitles are provided through the generous assistance of Jimmy Ren." thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/kAv5pahIevE/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/derivatives/inverse-functions-f-1-y-and-the-logarithm-x-ln-y" section="Derivatives (12 videos)" title="Inverse Functions f ^-1 (y) and the Logarithm x = ln y" description="For the usual y = f(x), the input is x and the output is y. For the INVERSE function x = f^-1(y), the input is y and the output is x. If y equals x cubed, then x is the cube root of y : that is the inverse. If y is the great function e^x, then x is the NATURAL LOGARITHM ln y. Start at y, go to x = ln y, then back to y = e^(ln y). So the LOGARITHM is the EXPONENT that produces y. The logarithm of y = e^5 is ln y = 5.    Logarithms grow very slowly....... Professor Strangs Calculus textbook (1st edition, 1991) is freely available here. Subtitles are provided through the generous assistance of Jimmy Ren." thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/I_ril7ToAi4/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/derivatives/derivatives-of-ln-y-and-sin-1-y" section="Derivatives (12 videos)" title="Derivatives of ln y and sin ^-1 (y)" description="Make a chain of a function and its inverse:  f^-1(f(x)) = x starts with x and ends with x. Take the slope using the Chain Rule.   On the right side the slope of x is 1. Chain Rule:  dx/dy dy/dx = 1   Here this says that df^-1/dy times df/dx equals 1. So the derivative of f^-1(y)  is  1/ (df/dx)  BUT you have to write df/dx in terms of y. The derivative of ln y is 1/ (derivative of f = e^x) = 1/e^x.   This is  1/y, a neat slope ! Changing letters is OK :  The derivative of ln x is 1/x.  Watch this video for GRAPHS Professor Strangs Calculus textbook (1st edition, 1991) is freely available here. Subtitles are provided through the generous assistance of Jimmy Ren." thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/cRsptYEK1G4/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/derivatives/growth-rate-and-log-graphs" section="Derivatives (12 videos)" title="Growth Rate and Log Graphs" description="It is good to know how fast different functions grow.  Professor Strang puts them in order from slow to fast: logarithm of x    powers of x    exponential of x     x factorial    x to the x power   What is even faster?? And it is good to know how graphs can show the key numbers in the growth rate of a function A LOG-LOG graph plots log y against log x   If y = A x^n then log y = log A + n log x == LINE WITH SLOPE n A SEMILOG graph plots log y against x        If y = A 10^cx then log y = log A + cx == LINE WITH SLOPE c You will never see y = 0 on these graphs because log 0 is minus infinity.  But n and c jump out clearly. Professor Strangs Calculus textbook (1st edition, 1991) is freely available here. Subtitles are provided through the generous assistance of Jimmy Ren." thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/WU1m2QQrlho/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/derivatives/linear-approximation-newtons-method" section="Derivatives (12 videos)" title="Linear Approximation/Newtons Method" description="The slope of a function y(x) is the slope of its TANGENT LINE Close to x=a, the line with slope y  (a) gives a linear approximation y(x) is close to y(a) + (x - a) times y  (a) If you want to solve y(x) = 0, choose x so that y(a) + (x - a) y  (a) = 0 This is a really fast way to get close to the exact solution to  y(x) = 0 : Newtons Method      x = a - y(a)/y (a)          SEE THE EXAMPLES Professor Strangs Calculus textbook (1st edition, 1991) is freely available here. Subtitles are provided through the generous assistance of Jimmy Ren." thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/U0xlKuFqCuI/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/derivatives/power-series-eulers-great-formula" section="Derivatives (12 videos)" title="Power Series/Eulers Great Formula" description="A special power series is e^x = 1 + x + x^2 / 2! + x^3 / 3! + ... + every x^n / n! The series continues forever but for any x it adds up to the number e^x If you multiply each x^n / n! by the nth derivative of f(x) at x = 0, the series adds to f(x) This is a TAYLOR SERIES.    Of course all those derivatives are 1 for e^x. Two great series are cos x = 1 - x^2 / 2! + x^4 / 4! ... and sin x = x - x^3 / 3! .... cosine has even powers, sine has odd powers, both have alternating plus/minus signs Fermat saw magic using i^2 = -1   Then  e^ix  exactly matches   cos x + i sin x. Professor Strangs Calculus textbook (1st edition, 1991) is freely available here. Subtitles are provided through the generous assistance of Jimmy Ren." thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/N4ceWhmXxcs/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/derivatives/differential-equations-of-motion" section="Derivatives (12 videos)" title="Differential Equations of Motion" description="These equations have 2nd derivatives because acceleration is in Newtons Law F = ma The key model equation is (second derivative) y   = MINUS y or y   =  MINUS a^2 y There are two solutions since the equation is second order.  They are SINE and COSINE y =  sin (at)  and y = cos (at)    Two derivatives bring back sine and cosine with minus a^2 The next step allows damping (first derivative)  as in my   +  dy  + ky = 0   How to solve? Just try y = e^at   !!  You find that   ma^2 + da + k = 0   Two as give two solutions: good Professor Strangs Calculus textbook (1st edition, 1991) is freely available here. Subtitles are provided through the generous assistance of Jimmy Ren." thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/4PBYm3FuUNQ/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/derivatives/differential-equations-of-growth" section="Derivatives (12 videos)" title="Differential Equations of Growth" description="The key model for growth (or decay when c < 0) is  dy/dt = c y(t) The next model allows a steady source (constant s in dy/dt = cy + s ) The solutions include an exponential e^ct  (because its derivative brings down c) So growth forever if c is positive and decay if c is negative A neat model for the population P(t) adds in minus sP^2  (so P wont grow forever) This is nonlinear but luckily the equation for y = 1/P is linear and we solve it Population P follows an S-curve reaching a number like 10 or 11 billion (???) Great lecture but Professor Strang should have written e^-ct in the last formula Professor Strangs Calculus textbook (1st edition, 1991) is freely available here. Subtitles are provided through the generous assistance of Jimmy Ren." thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/IDo4uPyqQbQ/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/derivatives/six-functions-six-rules-and-six-theorems" section="Derivatives (12 videos)" title="Six Functions, Six Rules, and Six Theorems" description="This lecture compresses all the others into one fast video for review of derivatives. Five of the 6 functions are old, the new one is a STEP function.  Slope = DELTA function. The 6 rules cover f + g, f times g, f divided by g, chains f(g(x)), inverse of f, and then LHOPITAL for 0/0 The 6 theorems include the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus for INTEGRAL OF DERIVATIVE OF f(x) Function 1 is f(x)   Function 2 is its slope (rate of change)   Add up those changes to recover f(x)  !! The MEAN VALUE THEOREM says that if your average speed is 70,  then instant speed is 70 at least once The BINOMIAL THEOREM tells you the series that adds up to the pth power f(x) = (1 + x)^p Professor Strangs Calculus textbook (1st edition, 1991) is freely available here. Subtitles are provided through the generous assistance of Jimmy Ren." thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/LgWFurXHX8U/default.jpg" >}}